[Unknown]: IVM.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, my guest in this episode is the economist Tyler Carvin.
[Amit Varma]: Though describing him as an economist seems inadequate, Tyler is a polymath who blogs
[Amit Varma]: at Marginal Revolution, which is by far my favorite blog in the world, and he's written
[Amit Varma]: numerous books on a variety of subjects.
[Amit Varma]: He also runs a Marginal Revolution University, MRU, with his Marginal Revolution co-blogger
[Amit Varma]: Alex Tabarrok, who has been a guest on the Scene and the Unseen a couple of times.
[Amit Varma]: The subject I invited Tyler to chat about is his latest book, Stubborn Attachments.
[Amit Varma]: This is not actually a book of economics, but of moral philosophy.
[Amit Varma]: In a nutshell, Tyler makes a number of bold assertions in this book.
[Amit Varma]: One, he argues that we need to regard future lives of people who haven't yet been born
[Amit Varma]: as morally equivalent to the lives of those alive today.
[Amit Varma]: We should not discount those lives at all.
[Amit Varma]: Two, he argues that for this reason, aiming for high economic growth is a moral imperative,
[Amit Varma]: as that will lead to the best outcomes for future humans, and so we need to build institutions
[Amit Varma]: and social norms that maximize the chances of achieving sustainable high economic growth.
[Amit Varma]: Three, he says that we should do all of this within the constraints of human rights, which
[Amit Varma]: he defines to be negative rights.
[Amit Varma]: This conversation with him was recorded in late December 2018, but before we get to it,
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art, like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo x Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Amit Varma]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com, that's colors with
[Amit Varma]: an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20, that's IVM for IVM podcast, IVM20
[Amit Varma]: for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Tyler, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Happy to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Tyler, my friends and I have a theory that there isn't actually one Tyler Carvin, it's
[Amit Varma]: a collective that calls itself Tyler Carvin because you actually get so much done that
[Amit Varma]: it seems impossible one person could manage it all, you write multiple posts a day on
[Amit Varma]: Marginal Revolution, you've written 15-16 books, you obviously read so much, you immerse
[Amit Varma]: yourself in other cultures, you travel, you've written a book about food, so you eat out
[Amit Varma]: a lot, and you teach.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm really curious, how do you structure your days?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what's a typical day in the life of Tyler Carvin like?
[Guest]: I try to wake up at exactly the same time, by 7am at the latest.
[Guest]: And then I start working right away, and every morning I treat writing as the most important
[Guest]: thing I do.
[Guest]: And I get some writing done.
[Guest]: And then the afternoon, all kinds of things can happen, but other things get done then
[Guest]: too.
[Guest]: And, you know, you stop maybe by 11pm and you go to bed.
[Guest]: I exercise somewhere in between, obviously I eat.
[Amit Varma]: That would be like a first cut at it.
[Amit Varma]: Do you set out a specific time for reading, or do you just read as and when you can?
[Guest]: When I can, but I really never read in the morning.
[Guest]: Mornings are for writing.
[Guest]: Now, when I travel, it's quite different.
[Guest]: I may just spend the whole day walking around, you know, looking, say, at Mumbai or wherever,
[Guest]: taking in things in a more intensive way than I could when I'm reading.
[Amit Varma]: And I read in an interview of yours that, you know, a lot of the books you read, you
[Amit Varma]: sort of, you know, you don't necessarily read all of them, but there are a few books that
[Amit Varma]: you really like that you go back to when you read them multiple times.
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of books that through your life have really, either A, books which have
[Amit Varma]: influenced you and influenced your thinking, and B, books which you just like to read and
[Guest]: reread again for pleasure?
[Guest]: Well, I'm reading for maybe the fifth or sixth time Homer's Odyssey.
[Guest]: There's a new translation by Emily Wilson, and I'm enjoying that a great deal.
[Guest]: The books I like to reread typically are very famous classic books like Adam Smith or Plato,
[Guest]: Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift.
[Guest]: They wouldn't be that hard to guess at.
[Guest]: Most books that come out today, you know, maybe they should have been articles.
[Guest]: They may have good parts or a chapter on a topic or country you're interested in, but
[Amit Varma]: I don't see why you should read the whole thing.
[Amit Varma]: That's true.
[Amit Varma]: And is there any book or are there any books that sort of were like a eureka moment for
[Guest]: you that changed the way you look at the world?
[Guest]: Well, reading Plato's Dialogues when I was 13 and 14 years old, that had really a big
[Guest]: impact on me.
[Guest]: It got me thinking more philosophically, and it just introduced me to Western thought and
[Guest]: the idea of dialogue.
[Guest]: So that Adam Smith, reading Hayek when I was quite young, those would be some of like the
[Amit Varma]: earthquake moments for me.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I mean, you've written 15 or 16 books, and one often assumes that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you write a book, you come up with the idea of a book, you spend a couple of years
[Amit Varma]: and you write it.
[Amit Varma]: But in the case of Stubborn Attachments, I read that you spent, you know, more than 20
[Amit Varma]: years actually thinking about this book, writing drafts of it, and, you know, getting it together
[Amit Varma]: in your head before you actually came out with the book.
[Amit Varma]: Can you sort of take me on your intellectual journey through the questions of this book?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what are the big questions in this book that you were trying to answer that concerned
[Amit Varma]: you?
[Amit Varma]: And did you come up with different answers to those questions at any point?
[Guest]: When I was at Harvard in 1984, I was in Harvard bookstore.
[Guest]: And just coincidentally, I picked up a copy of Derek Barfitt's Reasons and Persons, which
[Guest]: is still one of my favorite books.
[Guest]: And that book was another of these earthquake moments.
[Guest]: And that was just his take, you know, on the self and how to think about value and how
[Guest]: to aggregate or not aggregate.
[Guest]: And I just thought, well, I need to spend a big chunk of my life in some way responding
[Guest]: to this book or addressing it.
[Guest]: So the issues I've been thinking about since 1984 and about 20 years ago, I think I've
[Guest]: now lost track exactly how long, I started writing a manuscript on the value of civilization.
[Guest]: That would be my account of what value is.
[Guest]: And I thought, well, you know, a book like this, I can't just finish it in two or three
[Guest]: years.
[Guest]: I've got to work with, I'll need to think about for a long time, talk about with many
[Guest]: other people, see, you know, much more what has been published on the topic.
[Guest]: So just every year, I would spend about a month revising.
[Guest]: And this book kept on changing.
[Guest]: A lot of the time, the changes were just me cutting things.
[Guest]: And finally, it's come out.
[Guest]: So I'm very happy about that.
[Guest]: But a lot of my books are these like longer term investments.
[Guest]: You know, my book on food, I didn't spend that long writing it.
[Guest]: But I spent many years eating, and it's really the distillation of what I learned, you know,
[Guest]: traveling and eating.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, that's another very long production period.
[Amit Varma]: And that's actually a really lovely short book.
[Amit Varma]: I quote from it often when I go out to eat, in fact, let's kind of talk about stubborn
[Amit Varma]: attachments.
[Amit Varma]: What's the central question that you're trying to answer through this book?
[Guest]: What is the correct way to think about the best society?
[Guest]: What standard could we plausibly use to judge one social outcome as better than another?
[Guest]: And finally, what kind of thinking should guide economic policy?
[Guest]: And I decide that this notion of compound returns and economic growth is really central
[Guest]: to solving all of those puzzles.
[Guest]: So it's very much a pro-economic growth book.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And you write about this concept called the crosonia plant in the book as a metaphor for
[Guest]: economic growth.
[Guest]: Yes, think of the crosonia plant as representing compound returns.
[Guest]: So say you have an apple tree and the apple tree gives you apples and the apples in turn
[Guest]: give you more apple trees.
[Guest]: There's this notion of things which, of their own steam, keep on growing forever and give
[Guest]: you more and more value.
[Guest]: And a well-structured economy is one of those.
[Guest]: And I argue we can think of those as the fundamental sources of value at the social level in human
[Guest]: affairs.
[Guest]: And the one definitive claim we can make is that an economy which is much wealthier is
[Guest]: clearly better than an economy or society which is much poorer.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a sort of a debate that keeps cropping up because despite the overwhelming
[Amit Varma]: evidence that points out that wealth and social welfare are completely correlated and it's
[Amit Varma]: very clear that economic growth causes people to live better lives, it's still something
[Amit Varma]: that's oddly enough questioned in many circles.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think that is?
[Amit Varma]: Why that skepticism when the data is so clear?
[Guest]: I think there are a number of reasons why people are reluctant to accept a more optimistic
[Guest]: outlook or the notion that a lot of other values can be subsumed by having some form
[Guest]: of economic growth.
[Guest]: I think a lot of people, they're programmed to want to complain and they end up with other
[Guest]: views.
[Guest]: But this is why I called the book Stubborn Attachments.
[Guest]: I argue we should literally have a stubborn attachment to this idea of growth and also
[Guest]: to an idea of human rights.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, stick with them stubbornly.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And you also sort of make the case that measuring economic growth of wealth through GDP itself
[Amit Varma]: is insufficient.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about something which you call wealth plus.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about wealth plus.
[Amit Varma]: What more does it have besides GDP and how do we measure it?
[Guest]: Well, to give an example from India, some parts of India, such as Kerala, are in some
[Guest]: ways better off than just numerical wealth might indicate.
[Guest]: So they have stronger social indicators.
[Guest]: Environmental factors may be something else that's not fully captured in GDP or leisure
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: So I think GDP is actually a fine number for many purposes.
[Guest]: It often comes close enough.
[Guest]: But for some final decisions, we need to also incorporate social indicators, the value of
[Guest]: the environment, and also leisure time.
[Amit Varma]: So that's how I would modify GDP.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And you sort of write in your book that because, you know, compound interest is something that
[Amit Varma]: is so underestimated and, you know, you point out about how if you ask someone by how much
[Amit Varma]: has the standard of living in America gone up in the last hundred years that your typical
[Amit Varma]: guesstimate of someone you ask could be, what, 50% a couple of times, but it's actually seven
[Amit Varma]: eight times because people underestimate the value of compound interest and also a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the growth, I guess, can't be quantified because the remarkable amount of information
[Amit Varma]: that you can access on your smartphone, for example, or the fact that no human being will
[Amit Varma]: ever get lost again because of technology.
[Amit Varma]: You know, how do you quantify that stuff?
[Amit Varma]: There's no economic figure that can capture that.
[Guest]: I agree with that, but I think for actual comparisons, if you simply look at GDP growth
[Guest]: rates over time and again, adjust them a small amount, they come close enough.
[Guest]: So the countries that measure as having the highest GDP really are the countries with
[Guest]: the highest living standards.
[Guest]: Maybe the oil monarchies would be somewhat of an exception to that.
[Guest]: But if you look at the United States, Canada, Australia, Norway, those are the places where
[Guest]: people want to migrate to if they can, and they're the places with high GDP.
[Guest]: So I think the measure works surprisingly well.
[Guest]: It doesn't mean that money is all that matters or even the main thing.
[Guest]: But as you mentioned, GDP correlates with having a more secure life, lower levels of
[Guest]: stress, a more rewarding or safer, more creative job, many, many other non-monetary goods.
[Amit Varma]: And there'll be naysayers on the left who will sort of say that, hey, economic growth
[Amit Varma]: is all well and fine, but it's not across the board, there's inequality.
[Amit Varma]: What about those who are left behind and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: The best remedy for those who are left behind is economic growth.
[Guest]: You see this in the history of China.
[Guest]: The Chinese economy is about 40 times larger than it was, you know, about 50 years ago.
[Guest]: That's just astonishing.
[Guest]: China not only has more billionaires than the United States, but it has a healthy and
[Guest]: growing middle class.
[Guest]: And Chinese rural areas are also much, much better off than they had been where there
[Guest]: used to be starvation.
[Guest]: People now eat really very well.
[Guest]: So again, if you're asking what's the one thing we can do that's better for virtually
[Guest]: everyone, I think the unique answer which stands out is economic growth.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I, you know, when talking about inequality, I tend to say that it's a luxury of rich countries
[Amit Varma]: to think about it, that people in India should just focus on poverty, which is a very different
[Amit Varma]: problem and inequality and poverty are very different, they require different solutions.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I often I mean, one clear indicator of this is that, you know, you don't see any
[Amit Varma]: poor people trying to migrate to Bangladesh, they're trying to migrate to the US.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, you don't see any migration away from cities, you see them migrating to
[Amit Varma]: cities and if inequality was a big problem, that should have been the other way around.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And even in the US, I mean, most ordinary Americans don't care about inequality.
[Guest]: They care about whether or not they have a good job or growing wages.
[Guest]: If they care about inequality, they compare themselves to their high school classmates,
[Guest]: you know, not to billionaires or Bill Gates.
[Guest]: So the inequalities that people actually get bothered by are quite local.
[Amit Varma]: They're within families or all groups of friends or peers.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, often people also say that, look, you know, economic growth is all well
[Amit Varma]: and fine, but money can't buy happiness.
[Amit Varma]: Can happiness be measured and is that something that you'd agree with?
[Guest]: I wouldn't say money can buy happiness, but having a wealthier society is the best thing
[Guest]: you can do to get higher levels of happiness.
[Guest]: So it just gives people a more secure foundation for other things they wish to do to seek their
[Guest]: happiness.
[Guest]: So I would say, you know, it's steps A, B and C, if your goal is to just make people
[Guest]: happy.
[Guest]: Now, I'm an ethical pluralist.
[Guest]: I don't think happiness is the only value.
[Guest]: I think aesthetics, creativity, justice, all these things matter.
[Guest]: But for the most part, they also do better in these wealthier societies.
[Amit Varma]: And you also pointed out that, you know, people often measure happiness through surveys by
[Amit Varma]: asking people if they are happy.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that measurement leads to a sort of a language problem.
[Amit Varma]: Like you correctly said, you know, a poor person in Kenya who's relatively better off
[Amit Varma]: than his neighbors might actually rate higher on the happiness scale, according to how he
[Amit Varma]: sees himself, than an American who in reality is actually far better off and even happier,
[Guest]: though he doesn't express it that way.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: I think when you look at numerous other indicators, such as what people actually choose, the case
[Guest]: that wealth is correlated with happiness is really pretty strong.
[Guest]: Wealthier societies, there's also greater life expectancy.
[Guest]: So you just live longer, you have more years of whatever level of happiness you're going
[Guest]: to have.
[Guest]: And these measures don't pick that up, because the questionnaires, you're only asking people
[Amit Varma]: who are alive, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another thing that you've kind of pointed out is that, you know, this is
[Amit Varma]: like you say that there are three questions that we should ask ourselves when deciding
[Amit Varma]: on what we should do.
[Amit Varma]: And those three questions are, A, what can we do to boost the rate of economic growth?
[Amit Varma]: B, what can we do to make our civilization more stable?
[Amit Varma]: C, how should we deal with our environmental problems?
[Amit Varma]: Because this obviously has an effect on future generations.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, you know, the first of those questions about economic growth is
[Amit Varma]: something that libertarians would be attracted to.
[Amit Varma]: The second of those about civilizations being more stable is more something that would appeal
[Amit Varma]: more to conservatives and environmental problems more to left wingers.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact that you sort of require a consensus on all of these, if this vision is to be sort
[Amit Varma]: of accepted as a moral vision, isn't that more of a bug than a feature?
[Amit Varma]: Because now we are divided into political tribes, and you're never actually going to
[Amit Varma]: get anyone to agree with something that's a concern of the opposing political tribe
[Amit Varma]: reflexively.
[Guest]: Well, I'm not sure how many people will agree with me, but I think the important thing is
[Guest]: to put out what you think is right.
[Guest]: And the world political opinion isn't a bad way in today's world.
[Guest]: In most countries, I guess I have the intuitive view that if what you're saying irritates
[Guest]: everyone just a bit, maybe you're on the right track.
[Guest]: And if you're just, you know, picking one of the sides and saying, rah, rah, this is
[Guest]: my team, probably you're on the wrong track.
[Guest]: Now, that doesn't mean my view is right.
[Guest]: But again, the goal is not to persuade people in the short term, that may be hopeless.
[Guest]: But sort of the long term, how people think about the world a generation from now, I hope
[Amit Varma]: is along the lines I'm suggesting ideas do change.
[Amit Varma]: And you sort of told me that, you know, one of the earthquake books for you, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: was Plato's dialogues.
[Amit Varma]: But in today's times, given what discourse has become, is Socratic dialogue even possible?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what social media has done is it's enabled all of us to find these echo chambers.
[Amit Varma]: And you often find that, you know, social media, especially, and all of political discourse
[Amit Varma]: really is incredibly polarized, where people aren't talking to each other anymore.
[Amit Varma]: They're talking past each other.
[Amit Varma]: They're posturing to raise their stature in their in group, are the days of Socratic dialogue
[Amit Varma]: behind us?
[Guest]: Well, people sometimes say that, but I'm not convinced it's gotten any worse.
[Guest]: And in a lot of ways, it's better.
[Guest]: So you can use the internet to reach out to anyone.
[Guest]: I mean, you emailed me to set up this Skype call and podcast, probably, we don't agree
[Guest]: on a bunch of things.
[Guest]: But here we are talking.
[Guest]: And go back to the 1970s, where there's, you know, no internet, there's television, which
[Guest]: is awful in the US, just three major networks, it's all boring and stupid and mainstream.
[Guest]: It was very hard to like break into, you know, writing for newspapers, I think it's much
[Guest]: better now.
[Guest]: So partly because like the pond is so much bigger, you have more ideologues and more
[Amit Varma]: intolerance, but you also have much, much more real dialogue.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on back to your book now, you know, one of the controversial points you made was
[Amit Varma]: about time preferences about how, you know, we all tend naturally to discount the long
[Amit Varma]: term, and think of the short term, and this is especially true when it comes to all the
[Amit Varma]: people who are alive today versus all the people who might live 200, 300, 400 years
[Amit Varma]: from now.
[Amit Varma]: And we discount the value to them.
[Amit Varma]: And what we do is not with reference to the kind of lives that they will have.
[Amit Varma]: And your dual argument is that number one, we should treat those lives as equivalent
[Amit Varma]: or almost equivalent.
[Amit Varma]: And we should design our policies and our actions accordingly.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: And I think what that means in practical terms, is the best thing we can do for the future
[Guest]: is to invest in better institutions and better rules and norms today.
[Guest]: It's not that we can control future events 30, 40 years out in any kind of fine detailed
[Guest]: predictable way.
[Guest]: But we should have this obsession on making our procedures and processes as good as possible.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that is exactly the right advice.
[Amit Varma]: And that actually goes against both, I mean, as you correctly pointed out, people are wired
[Amit Varma]: to think of the short term, possibly because we evolved in prehistoric times.
[Amit Varma]: And in the hunter gatherer rage, it's you know, you're going to survive longer if you
[Amit Varma]: think of the short term imperative of surviving rather than think 10-20 years into the future.
[Amit Varma]: So one, people think automatically in the short term.
[Amit Varma]: And two, when you think of the political economy, if you just look at what the incentives for
[Amit Varma]: political parties are like, every party just gives a damn about one thing.
[Amit Varma]: They want to win the next election, they don't really care.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just to take an example from India, which is going on these days, is that it has
[Amit Varma]: now become the rigor for any party which wants to win elections, to offer farm loan waivers
[Amit Varma]: to farmers.
[Amit Varma]: And farmers, of course, are I mean, we are in the middle of an agricultural crisis, farmers
[Amit Varma]: are in great distress, it's completely natural for them to ask for farm loan waivers.
[Amit Varma]: And it's completely natural, therefore, for the supply side of the political marketplace
[Amit Varma]: to promise them those farm loan waivers.
[Amit Varma]: And rationally, everybody can sort of say that, look, this is not really good for the
[Amit Varma]: long term, what we need to do for the long term is we need to do structural reforms and
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But there's no demand for that in electoral politics.
[Amit Varma]: Thinking of the long term just doesn't come naturally either to individuals, and it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: make sense to politicians to cater for it.
[Amit Varma]: So even if people agree with you at a rational level, that yes, this is how we should think
[Amit Varma]: to be moral beings, how does that find expression in actual action?
[Guest]: This same kind of problem is becoming worse in my country as well in my politics.
[Guest]: But what I find striking is you have many countries, often democracies, where it's not
[Guest]: nearly as bad.
[Guest]: If you look at Norway or Switzerland, or New Zealand, Singapore is not not quite a full
[Guest]: normal democracy, but nonetheless, they have good governance.
[Guest]: They do have much longer time perspectives.
[Guest]: And I don't, in every case, know what the secret is for that difference in perspective,
[Guest]: but I think it shows it's possible.
[Guest]: So I would just like to see American political debate reoriented much more along this idea
[Amit Varma]: of economic growth.
[Amit Varma]: And do you see that happening?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it going in the wrong direction?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you at some level believe that the arc of history, despite these little, you know,
[Amit Varma]: ups and downs eventually moves towards freedom?
[Guest]: I think in my country, it's going in the wrong direction, the world as a whole, it's probably
[Guest]: still moving in a more positive direction.
[Guest]: You have so many countries now trying to achieve economic growth, even if they're failing.
[Guest]: And you look at a place like Ethiopia, they've now had 10 years in a row of averaging about
[Guest]: 10% growth a year.
[Guest]: And that's fantastic.
[Guest]: Something like that never would have or could have happened in the 70s, 80s, or even 1990s.
[Guest]: So I think I'm optimistic.
[Guest]: But you know, there's not a set answer.
[Guest]: It is up to us.
[Guest]: And a lot of countries, they get wealthy, and they grow sloppy in their thinking.
[Guest]: And that's what's happened in America.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, in your book, when you make the case for valuing future lives, as importantly
[Amit Varma]: as current lives, there's a really nice quote by you, a start quote, imagine finding out
[Amit Varma]: that you having just reached your 21st birthday, must soon die of cancer, because Cleopatra
[Amit Varma]: wanted an extra helping of desert.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And here, of course, you're sort of putting the reader in the place of a person in the
[Amit Varma]: future and saying that, look, that person matters also, and therefore your actions matter.
[Amit Varma]: But if we go back into the past, you've made a case for, you know, that do past actions
[Amit Varma]: and lives matter as much as present lives?
[Guest]: I think it's striking how much persistence there is in cultures.
[Guest]: So there's a paper by Bill Easterly showing that per capita income in the year 500 AD
[Guest]: actually has a fair amount of predictive power for per capita income today.
[Guest]: So if you look at, say, the countries that were part of the Roman Empire way back when,
[Guest]: compared to the rest of the world, they're still doing relatively well.
[Guest]: China is rising again.
[Guest]: It has earlier traditions that can draw upon.
[Guest]: So just the persistence of the quality of the decisions we make today, I think, is often
[Amit Varma]: underrated.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and a sort of unrelated question, not something that has to do with the argument
[Amit Varma]: we're making, but it just struck me when I was reading these bits, is that do you think
[Amit Varma]: at some level, we should also discount past lives completely in the sense, let's say that
[Amit Varma]: past lives and actions don't matter?
[Amit Varma]: Because what we sort of see in India, and no doubt across the world, but, you know,
[Amit Varma]: with reference to India, is that there is this constant vicious cycle of the past being
[Amit Varma]: invoked.
[Amit Varma]: For example, a few hundred years ago, a Mughal emperor, you know, broke a temple here allegedly
[Amit Varma]: and built a mosque.
[Amit Varma]: We must now break the mosque and build a temple, which is something that the right will say,
[Amit Varma]: or the left might say that, you know, Group A was oppressed by Group B. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: we now have to switch the oppression and recompense from it, which is a thinking in a very zero
[Amit Varma]: some kind of way.
[Amit Varma]: And B, it opens the gate for identity politics, which just vitiates the hatred between people
[Amit Varma]: and doesn't help us move past that.
[Guest]: Is that an issue?
[Guest]: It's a huge issue.
[Guest]: I don't think we'll ever succeed in really ignoring the past.
[Guest]: Maybe a big part of me would like to, but I would say, let's pull the stories from the
[Guest]: past and reinterpret those stories in a way that will do the most for us in the future.
[Guest]: So a very, you know, positive vision of what we can become and how we can work together
[Guest]: and how we can cooperate rather than these identity politics versions of the past.
[Guest]: So I would rather have the past working for me, given that I cannot abolish it.
[Amit Varma]: Tyler, we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: We'll be back in a minute.
[Unknown]: Hello, it's been another great week on IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: If you aren't following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: We've been running this thing for the last few weeks and we're going to keep doing it.
[Unknown]: If you are listening to an interesting show that you're enjoying, pause it, take a screenshot,
[Unknown]: tag us on your Instagram story and drop us a comment and we will post that to our own
[Unknown]: Instagram story.
[Unknown]: So I want to tell you about a new show that we're launching.
[Unknown]: It's called Gana Tantra.
[Unknown]: It is hosted by Surya Natarajan and Alok Prasanna Kumar.
[Unknown]: They discuss how politics goes beyond intriguing elections and its implications in everyday
[Unknown]: life.
[Unknown]: I think you'll really enjoy that.
[Unknown]: Also starting on the 4th of February, we're launching a new show with Ambi Parmeswaran.
[Unknown]: It's called The Sponge Podcast.
[Unknown]: He talks about all the invaluable lessons he learned from his 40 years of experience
[Unknown]: in advertising.
[Unknown]: Speaking of Ambi, he's also on the Filter Coffee podcast with Karthik Nagarajan this
[Unknown]: week.
[Unknown]: They discuss the importance of data and advertising.
[Unknown]: It's a really, really insightful conversation, which I think you would enjoy.
[Unknown]: On Sider Says, we have author Mopia Basu, who talks about her new book on the Rani Ujjansi
[Unknown]: and clarifies some historical misconceptions held about Indian history.
[Unknown]: On Pesa Vesa, Anupam talks to Ashok Kumar, CEO and co-founder of Scriptbox about the
[Unknown]: importance of tax planning and the effective ways in which you can save tax.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati Podcast, catch special guest Ambassador Shiv Shankar Menon in conversation
[Unknown]: with Pawan about the importance of connectivity on a geopolitical scale and the economics
[Unknown]: behind it.
[Unknown]: Here's what's in store for you on our regional language shows.
[Unknown]: On the Hindi show Puliya Bazi, the hosts do a deep dive into Dr. Ambedkar's most famous
[Unknown]: yet controversial essay, The Annihilation of Caste.
[Unknown]: On the Hindi film show Cinemaya, director Paromita Vora joins Swati to talk about her
[Unknown]: documentaries, her directorial decisions and the politics behind camera.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you back to your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Tyler Cowen.
[Amit Varma]: Tyler, the second big ingredient of your sort of the moral vision that you lay out.
[Amit Varma]: The first ingredient, of course, is we must aim for economic growth because it compounds
[Amit Varma]: over time.
[Amit Varma]: And the second ingredient is we must, however, do this with the strong constraint of rights.
[Amit Varma]: Can you explain that to me a little bit?
[Amit Varma]: And also, what do you mean by rights?
[Amit Varma]: Because people everywhere kind of get confused between positive and negative rights, and
[Amit Varma]: it gets very muddy.
[Guest]: I mean, negative rights, freedom from coercion and arbitrary murder.
[Guest]: So just to be clear, most of the book is about economic growth, as I think our conversation
[Guest]: has indicated.
[Guest]: But there's a kind of rejoinder I was worried about, someone who might say, well, you know,
[Guest]: what about Joseph Stalin?
[Guest]: He killed all these people, but it helped the Soviet Union grow at a rapid clip.
[Guest]: Well, you know, I don't think it's true that Stalin killing people boosted Soviet economic
[Guest]: growth.
[Guest]: But the point I want to make in the book is not to argue that fact with people, but just
[Guest]: to show that killing innocent people is wrong.
[Guest]: You can have an absolute prohibition against it.
[Guest]: You don't have to think we should do that to get economic growth, that you have morals
[Guest]: and you have the practical benefits of growth.
[Guest]: And the right way to think about the world is to combine those two things and think of
[Guest]: human rights as a constraint that you should operate within.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about that constraint being nearly absolute.
[Amit Varma]: What does it nearly indicate?
[Guest]: Well, I think if there were some kind of strange case where to save the whole future history
[Guest]: of the world, you had to kill some number of people, you know, maybe to fight World
[Guest]: War Two, to stop Hitler from taking over the world.
[Guest]: I think rights are embedded within the context of a world.
[Guest]: And if you need to fight to save the world, you are then in some cases justified in infringing
[Guest]: on people's rights.
[Guest]: So if we had to have, say, a draft to fight World War Two, I mean, that did kill some
[Guest]: innocent people.
[Guest]: But I don't think that's wrong.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: But really, you need extreme cases.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you mentioned that in your real world experience, you couldn't actually think of
[Amit Varma]: extreme cases where, you know, infringing rights would be justified.
[Amit Varma]: Not anything lately now.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: You then also have a chapter on a rather controversial subject of redistribution, where you talk
[Amit Varma]: about our responsibility to the poor, and you talk about how some amount of redistribution
[Amit Varma]: might be necessary, but not too much.
[Amit Varma]: How does that work?
[Amit Varma]: Like what amount is necessary?
[Amit Varma]: And where do you draw the line?
[Guest]: Well, a lot of redistribution actually boosts economic growth.
[Guest]: So if you remove the risk of malnutrition from children, or give them better education,
[Guest]: or maybe clean up a water system, those all have great potential to boost growth.
[Guest]: And I'm all for that kind of activity.
[Guest]: But that said, a lot of redistribution is just for redistribution's sake.
[Guest]: It may make incentives worse.
[Guest]: Poor people have less of an incentive to earn more income, wealthier people are taxed at
[Guest]: higher rates, then I'm much more sceptical.
[Guest]: So I would say let's do all the growth enhancing redistribution we can.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the question that then comes up there is that if we are balancing, say
[Amit Varma]: the consequentialism of your essential vision against the rights that we say are a constraint
[Amit Varma]: against that, any kind of redistribution does infringe negative rights in some way, because
[Amit Varma]: obviously it's money coerced from people.
[Guest]: How do you reconcile that?
[Guest]: In my view, democratically voted taxation is not an infringement on rights per se.
[Guest]: I mean, maybe it would be if it reached some level that were like extortion.
[Guest]: But if people vote to tax themselves and provide some public goods, including redistribution,
[Guest]: I don't per se consider that a violation of human rights.
[Guest]: They may mess up, you know, whether it's done well or not.
[Guest]: But in principle, it has the potential of making virtually all of us better off.
[Amit Varma]: Right, but that's kind of, you know, if two wolves and goat have dinner together and the
[Amit Varma]: wolves want to eat the goat and they take a vote on it, then you know, the majority
[Amit Varma]: would want to eat the goat, but the goats rights would, you know, be infringed in that
[Amit Varma]: sense.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the whole idea of negative rights is that you don't go by what the majority
[Amit Varma]: wants, but you protect the rights of every individual.
[Amit Varma]: And the whole, the sort of classical liberal vision of the state, I would imagine comes
[Amit Varma]: from accepting that you do need a state to protect rights, and therefore that calls for
[Amit Varma]: a necessary infringement of rights.
[Amit Varma]: But anything beyond that becomes problematic.
[Guest]: I would agree with most of that.
[Guest]: I don't think there's an absolute right to all of your income.
[Guest]: I do think there's a right to your life.
[Guest]: But if you have, say, a government, which is reasonably accountable and based on democratic
[Guest]: principles and it taxes from people say 30% of their income, I don't think that's an unjustifiable
[Guest]: violation of rights.
[Guest]: It's very different from say, rounding people up and putting them in camps and killing them.
[Guest]: It's something you would like to minimize that taxation.
[Guest]: But again, there's not actually an alternative that will give people more liberty.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And as far as redistribution is concerned, you draw the line by saying that you redistribute
[Amit Varma]: only up to the point that it maximizes sustainable economic growth.
[Amit Varma]: Doesn't this sort of run up against Kant's categorical imperative that you should not
[Amit Varma]: use people as a means to an end, where here you are kind of thinking of people as a means
[Amit Varma]: to an end, which is sustainable economic growth for the future to benefit future generations
[Guest]: and so on?
[Guest]: I don't agree with Kant's imperative.
[Guest]: I think we need to be consequentialists and do things to maximize how good consequences
[Guest]: will be.
[Guest]: This will often mean in the short run, some people either lose out or they are treated
[Guest]: as means to an end.
[Guest]: But again, if you think of compounded growth over time, you'll have to meet what is by
[Guest]: far the best outcome.
[Guest]: So this is not a Kantian book.
[Guest]: You can think of it in part as a response to Kant.
[Amit Varma]: And a common criticism against consequentialism, which you also addressed in this book is obviously
[Amit Varma]: the epistemic problem that, okay, we judge actions according to their consequences.
[Amit Varma]: But how can we know ahead of time what those consequences will be?
[Amit Varma]: And this becomes particularly acute at scale at a level of public policy, where we've already
[Amit Varma]: had enormous follies earlier in the century in terms of central planning and so on, running
[Amit Varma]: up against Hayek's knowledge problem.
[Amit Varma]: How do you reconcile the epistemic problem that is inevitable when it comes to planning
[Amit Varma]: anything?
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: Well, I think we should bite that bullet and swallow it.
[Guest]: So in many cases, we should be very modest about how likely we are to be right.
[Guest]: Of course, you should pursue the course of action you think is most likely to be right.
[Guest]: But you should not be very dogmatic and think, well, I have it exactly right.
[Guest]: I would say when it comes to economic growth, we often know a great deal about how to thwart
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But it's much harder to have very exact knowledge on how to stimulate it.
[Guest]: And I think that's the level of agnosticism we should have.
[Guest]: So we shouldn't think we know everything about every public policy issue, because we don't.
[Amit Varma]: So for me, that's a feature, not a bug.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I was, I had an interesting conversation yesterday, I had a historian called Gyan Prakash
[Amit Varma]: on my show, and he's just written a book about the revisiting the emergency and looking deeper
[Amit Varma]: into its root causes and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that he tangentially wrote about there was the thrust towards family
[Amit Varma]: planning and population control in India, which, you know, took place over a period
[Amit Varma]: of decades and was driven by Americans like American institutions like the Ford Foundation,
[Amit Varma]: were actively talking about coercive family planning.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, the American government itself made aid conditional upon the Indian
[Amit Varma]: government carrying out family planning policies.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, this was magnified massively during the emergency.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, coercive family planning continues to this day, and is based as I know
[Amit Varma]: you would agree with me on, you know, flawed Malthusian principles and, you know, looking
[Amit Varma]: at human beings, not as resources, which they are, but as a problem and the damage that
[Amit Varma]: this sort of thinking caused, at that time was, you know, had enormous consequences.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are millions of people who would have been born and would have lived fulfilling
[Amit Varma]: lives who simply don't exist.
[Amit Varma]: And that seemed to me, you know, since it just happened yesterday, it seemed to me to
[Amit Varma]: be a great example of how, you know, consequentialism can go dramatically wrong, because all of
[Amit Varma]: those people were acting out of good intentions.
[Amit Varma]: And they were convinced they were right.
[Amit Varma]: And that this was a reasonable thing to do for the sake of future generations.
[Guest]: I agree with all your points.
[Guest]: But I wouldn't blame consequentialism, I would blame arrogance, a consistent consequentialist
[Guest]: will recognize how hard it is to calculate consequences.
[Guest]: And one simple consequence is if you have fewer children, there's less social insurance
[Guest]: within the family, or, you know, less chance you'll give birth to the next genius or great
[Guest]: inventor.
[Guest]: And that's a consequence too.
[Amit Varma]: So I would say they were not consequentialist enough.
[Amit Varma]: Right, and, you know, the other sort of criticism that can be leveled against, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: thesis that you've laid out, is that in your book, you really take the point of view of
[Amit Varma]: the species or the civilization across this great span of time, and not specifically the
[Amit Varma]: individual, like, you know, just going back to your earlier quote, when you talk about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Cleopatra wanting an extra helping of desert and someone dying of cancer today,
[Amit Varma]: but the thing is, does someone have the right to tell Cleopatra today to not have an extra
[Amit Varma]: helping of desert because someone hundreds of years later may die of cancer?
[Guest]: Well, you have to ask which are the actions of Cleopatra that might have wrecked the world.
[Guest]: And maybe there were some she was not in every way a good ruler, as I understand it.
[Guest]: But I don't think her heapings of desert were the problem.
[Guest]: That's the kind of joke that sentence.
[Guest]: She did not invest in durable institutions that could be passed down along the generations.
[Guest]: And for that, I think we should condemn her and she should have done it.
[Guest]: So this idea that there's a cultural persistence to good institutions, I think that's the obligation
[Guest]: of leaders is to support good institutions.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote another sentence from you where you sort of you handle the epistemic problem
[Amit Varma]: and you talk about how, when it comes to small uncertainties, we should just default to respecting
[Amit Varma]: rights.
[Amit Varma]: But when it comes to, you know, clearly big consequences, like sustained economic growth
[Amit Varma]: way into the future or preserving the environment for future generations, then we should act
[Amit Varma]: decisively.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you spoke about not being paralyzed by epistemic uncertainty.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a sentence where you say, quote, rather than letting it paralyze us, we can
[Amit Varma]: think of radical uncertainty as giving us the freedom to act morally, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And my thought here was, you know, why do we need radical uncertainty to give us the
[Amit Varma]: freedom to act morally?
[Amit Varma]: Why not act morally anyway?
[Amit Varma]: And wouldn't that lead to the best consequences?
[Guest]: Well, I think maybe it's easier to act morally.
[Guest]: If you're not sure your rights infringement will lead to good practical benefits.
[Guest]: So take this course of family planning, something I would be opposed to.
[Guest]: People really should have thought twice, three times about this and said, you know, we really
[Guest]: don't even know if this will do good.
[Guest]: And if you don't even know that you ought to think it will do good.
[Guest]: I think it's much easier to say, well, look, this is wrong.
[Guest]: It's coercing people.
[Guest]: We just shouldn't do it and leave it aside.
[Guest]: So I think it opens up the space to be moral without always looking over your shoulder
[Guest]: and wondering who's going to lose as a result of this.
[Guest]: Who's going to die?
[Guest]: What other grave consequences am I creating?
[Guest]: In a lot of cases, you just don't know, so do the right thing.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me if I've sort of summarized the thesis of your book accurately.
[Amit Varma]: You write that we have to think consequentially and we have to use rights as a constraint
[Amit Varma]: for that.
[Amit Varma]: And we have to most importantly, balance the lives of future generations and consider them
[Amit Varma]: as important as ours.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we have to aim for sustainable economic growth, pointing out, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: principle of compound interest, which philosophers may not have paid as much attention to as
[Amit Varma]: accountants.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, what you prescribe is that let us always aim for sustainable economic
[Amit Varma]: growth using rights as a constraint.
[Amit Varma]: And that's essentially the thesis of your book.
[Guest]: Is that an accurate summation?
[Guest]: I agree with all that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm never sure that a summation of a book is possible, but what you said sounded great.
[Amit Varma]: And is your thinking sort of a work in progress?
[Amit Varma]: Like, did you think differently 10 years ago or 20 years ago?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, what changed over a period of time as you thought about the book?
[Guest]: I think I've tried to improve the ideas, but I don't think they've changed fundamentally.
[Guest]: Maybe the main change in the book over time was the earlier drafts had a lot more on sustainability
[Guest]: and preserving the value of civilization against existential risk.
[Guest]: I haven't at all repudiated those ideas, but I found they've come out in a lot of other
[Guest]: books.
[Guest]: And I ended up mostly taking them out of mine just because I wanted to focus on what I thought
[Guest]: was my unique contribution.
[Amit Varma]: That would be the biggest change.
[Amit Varma]: And sort of moving away from the book for a moment, you know, you sort of live in America
[Amit Varma]: in the age of Trump and just looking at the way things are going, for example, you speak
[Amit Varma]: about how things might seem to be going backwards in the US, but they are doing well in the
[Amit Varma]: rest of the world.
[Amit Varma]: But Trump has just engaged on what could be called negative, some trade wars with China
[Amit Varma]: and others, which actually have a negative impact on the entire world, including us in
[Amit Varma]: India and increased instability everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel more hopeful about the future?
[Guest]: How do you look at all of that?
[Guest]: I think the world today is in a positive place that I could not have imagined, say, 40 years
[Guest]: ago.
[Guest]: And that should make us quite optimistic.
[Guest]: But I do see a number of countries, including in Eastern and Central Europe, Brazil, some
[Guest]: features of government in the United States, some features of government in India, China
[Guest]: being more autocratic, which I think are getting worse.
[Guest]: And that scares me.
[Guest]: So I would say the last two or three years, we've maybe needed to reassess our optimism
[Guest]: a bit.
[Guest]: But I still see the optimistic trends as stronger than the bad politics.
[Guest]: And I think the US will survive Trump.
[Guest]: I don't agree with the trade war.
[Guest]: But I do think China was doing a lot to steal intellectual property and conduct espionage.
[Guest]: And we did need to poke back at them in some way.
[Guest]: I don't agree with what we did.
[Guest]: But I think Trump, in some ways, has been speaking the truth about China also.
[Amit Varma]: And also, do you think that your moral vision for the future is something that or any moral
[Amit Varma]: vision for the future can really percolate to the level of politics?
[Amit Varma]: Because maybe I'm biased by the politics that I see in India, but what I see here is that
[Amit Varma]: politics tends to be morally corrosive, that once people enter the political sphere, the
[Amit Varma]: lust for power drowns out everything else.
[Amit Varma]: And even if they went into it with good intentions, and, you know, specific moral visions, those
[Amit Varma]: disappear as the imperatives of that political game kind of play out, and it becomes sort
[Amit Varma]: of impossible for anyone to really have any principles apart from catering to the interest
[Amit Varma]: groups and getting reelected once they reach the higher levels of politics.
[Guest]: You've had very clear moments in the history of Indian politics where people did the right
[Guest]: thing, people who fought for independence from the United Kingdom, Ambedkar, the reforms
[Guest]: of the 1990s.
[Guest]: I'm not saying those sentiments always last forever, but people have stood up and acted
[Guest]: for right and had lasting impact, and also boosted the rate of economic growth in India,
[Guest]: which is much higher than it used to be.
[Guest]: And post-independence was much higher than that compared to being a colony of Great Britain.
[Guest]: So even in Indian history, which has, you know, been fraught with a lot of negative
[Guest]: events, we've seen this happen and succeed.
[Guest]: So I would again be more optimistic than not.
[Amit Varma]: Tyler, let's end on a hopeful note.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot for spending so much of your time talking to me.
[Guest]: My pleasure.
[Guest]: And thank you for your interest in my book and for reading it so carefully.
[Guest]: Thanks, Ryla.
[Amit Varma]: Like every good book should be, Stubborn Attachments is thought-provoking, and it's also short
[Amit Varma]: enough to be read entirely in one sitting, so I strongly recommend that you pick it up.
[Amit Varma]: Because it's so accessible, it might even be a gateway book for new readers interested
[Amit Varma]: in moral philosophy.
[Amit Varma]: I also urge you to develop a new habit, reading Tyler Carvin and Alex Tabarrok's excellent
[Amit Varma]: blog, MarginalRevolution at MarginalRevolution.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Tyler on Twitter at Tyler Carvin, one word, Tyler Carvin, and you can follow
[Amit Varma]: me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at SeenUnseen.in and ThinkPragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Bye for now.
[Unknown]: Bye.